---
layout: post
title: Initial notes on angular
date: 2021-11-13 08:00:00:00 +0600
description: My initial notes on angular
img: posts/default-post.jpg # Add image post (optional)
fig-caption: None
tags: [development, angular]
---


## Angular versions

AngularJS (Angular 1) - This is the initial version
Angular2 - it's a complete rewrite to fix Angular1 problems, since then versioning has changed and it now there's angular 12 relased on May 12, 2021


## Installing Angular

1. Download the current LTS version of angular in https://nodejs.org/en/download/
*Note.* it's easier if you install the MSI version, so you don't have to setup PATHS manually for the node or npm commands.
2. Install the latest version of Angular using the following command 
{% highlight shell %}
npm install -g @angular/cli@latest
{% endhighlight %}

## Create a new project

To create a new project, we need to type from the command prompt.
*Note.* The project name cannot have any spaces or the word "test"

{% highlight shell %}
ng new <project name> --no-strict
{% endhighlight %}

The *--no-strict* flag is used to disable some optimizations along with best practices validation. This is to make our life easier in the begining of our development.

### Start the new server ###
We need to get into the folder and run ng serve

{% highlight shell %}
cd my-first-app
ng server
{% endhighlight %}

## Default project structure

- your-app
  - *angular.json* Defines angular build defaults
  - src
    - *index.html* default initial page UI.
	- *main.ts* This is the first code that gets executed.
    - app
	  - *app.component.html* Initial component UI.
	  - *app.component.ts* Main and default component code
	  - *app.module.ts* Main modules definition.

### app.component.ts

This is the defintion of a module, which will allows us to use it later.

**selector** is very important, because it allows us to define the name that we'll use to "insert" our module. 
We can insert a new module on an html by by using it as an html tag *e.g. <app-server></app-server>*


{% highlight typescript%}
import { Component } from "@angular/core";

@Component({
    selector: 'app-server', // Selector name
    templateUrl: './server.component.html'
})
export class ServerComponent {

}
{% endhighlight %}

### app.module.ts

Here you can add new modules to the application.

After you have added the module

{% highlight typescript%}
import { NgModule } from '@angular/core';
import { FormsModule } from '@angular/forms';
import { BrowserModule } from '@angular/platform-browser';
import { AppComponent } from './app.component';
import { ServerComponent } from './server/server.component';//New module, and actual location

@NgModule({
  declarations: [
    AppComponent,
    ServerComponent //New module declaration
  ],
  imports: [
    BrowserModule,
    FormsModule
  ],
  providers: [],
  bootstrap: [AppComponent]
})
export class AppModule { }

{% endhighlight %}


### angular.json

This is the main configuration file and it defines defaults for:
 
 - styles (css)
 - build
 - development tools (e.g. cli, schematics, architect)
 - libraries
 
*Note.* Paths are relative to the root folder of the workspace


## Add a new component
it can be done manually but you can also use the CLI

{% highlight shell %}
ng generate component <my-new-component>
{% endhighlight %}

This will generate the required files with a minimum content to start a new component.