---
layout: post
title: Microsoft Certification - AZ 900 - Quick review
date: 2023-02-01 08:00:00:00 +0600
description: Quick check for az-900.
img: posts/default-post.jpg # Add image post (optional)
fig-caption: Default
tags: [azure, microsoft, certification]
---
# Azure architecture and services


## Azure Virtual Machines
You can create and use VMs in the cloud. VMs provide infrastructure as a service (IaaS) in the form of a virtualized server

### Virtual machine scale sets
Virtual machine scale sets let you create and manage a group of identical, load-balanced VMs.
Scale sets allow you to centrally manage, configure, and update a large number of VMs in minutes. 
The number of VM instances can automatically increase or decrease in response to demand, or you can set it to scale based on a defined schedule.
It automatically deploys a load balanacer.

### Virtual machine availability sets
Availability sets are designed to ensure that VMs stagger updates and have varied power and network connectivity, preventing you from losing all your VMs with a single network or power failure.

 - **Update domain:** The update domain groups VMs that can be rebooted at the same time. 
 - **Fault domain:** The fault domain groups your VMs by common power source and network switch. 

## Azure Virtual Desktop
Azure Virtual Desktop is a desktop and application virtualization service that runs on the cloud.

## Azure Containers
 - Run multiple instances of an application on a single host machine.
 - Containers are a virtualization environment.
 
## Azure Functions
Azure Functions is an event-driven, serverless compute option.

## Hosting options

 - VM
 - Containers
 - Azure App Service
	- Web Apps
	- API apps
	- WebJobs
	- Mobile Apps

## Azure virtual networking

### Isolation and segmentation

 - Azure virtual network
 

### Internet communications
 
 - Public IP address
 - Public load balancer
 
### Communicate between Azure resources

 - Virtual networks
 - Service endpoints
 
### Communicate with on-premises resources

 - **Point-to-site virtual private network** connections are from a computer outside your organization back into your corporate network
 - **Site-to-site virtual private networks** link your on-premises VPN device or gateway to the Azure VPN gateway in a virtual network.
 - **Azure ExpressRoute** provides a dedicated private connectivity to Azure that doesn't travel over the internet.
 
### Route network traffic
 
 - **Route tables** allow you to define rules about how traffic should be directed.
 - **Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)** propagate on-premises BGP routes to Azure virtual networks.
 
### Filter network traffic

Azure virtual networks enable you to filter traffic between subnets.

 - **Network security groups** are Azure resources that can contain multiple inbound and outbound security rules.
 - **Network virtual appliances**

### Connect virtual networks

You can link virtual networks together by using virtual network peering.

## Azure Virtual Private Networks

A virtual private network (VPN) uses an encrypted tunnel within another network.

### VPN gateways

A VPN gateway is a type of virtual network gateway.

 - Connect on-premises datacenters to virtual networks through a site-to-site connection.
 - Connect individual devices to virtual networks through a point-to-site connection.
 - Connect virtual networks to other virtual networks through a network-to-network connection.
 
You can deploy only one VPN gateway in each virtual network. However, you can use one gateway to connect to multiple locations, which includes other virtual networks or on-premises datacenters.

 - **Policy-based VPN gateways** specify statically the IP address of packets that should be encrypted through each tunnel
 - **In Route-based gateways**, IPSec tunnels are modeled as a network interface or virtual tunnel interface

**High-availability scenarios**
 - Active/standby
 - Active/active
 - ExpressRoute failover
 - Zone-redundant gateways
 
## Azure ExpressRoute

Azure ExpressRoute lets you extend your on-premises networks into the Microsoft cloud over a private connection, with the help of a connectivity provider.


### ExpressRoute connectivity models

 - CloudExchange colocation
 - Point-to-point Ethernet connection
 - Any-to-any connection
 - Directly from ExpressRoute sites
 

## Azure DNS
Azure DNS is a hosting service for DNS domains that provides name resolution by using Microsoft Azure infrastructure.

## Azure storage

### Azure storage accounts
 - **Locally redundant storage (LRS)**
 - **Geo-redundant storage (GRS)**
 - **Read-access geo-redundant storage (RA-GRS)**
 - **Zone-redundant storage (ZRS)**
 - **Geo-zone-redundant storage (GZRS)**
 - **Read-access geo-zone-redundant storage (RA-GZRS)**
 
 TODO expand

### Azure storage services
 - **Azure Blobs:** A massively scalable object store for text and binary data. Also includes support for big data analytics through Data Lake Storage Gen2.
   - Access tiers:
     - Hot access tier:
	 - Cool access tier
	 - Archive access tier
 - **Azure Files:** Managed file shares for cloud or on-premises deployments.
 - **Azure Queues:** A messaging store for reliable messaging between application components.
 - **Azure Disks:** Block-level storage volumes for Azure VMs.
 
### Azure Data Box

Azure Data Box is a physical migration service that helps transfer large amounts of data in a quick, inexpensive, and reliable way.
 
### Azure file movement options

**AzCopy**
AzCopy is a command-line utility that you can use to copy blobs or files to or from your storage account. 

**Azure Storage Explorer**
Azure Storage Explorer is a standalone app that provides a graphical interface to manage files and blobs in your Azure Storage Account.

**Azure File Sync**
Azure File Sync is a tool that lets you centralize your file shares in Azure Files.
it will automatically stay bi-directionally synced with your files in Azure.
